I have great trouble formulating a review of this manuscript. To some extent this trouble reflects gaps in my own knowledge of some of the decomposition approaches that the paper references (so, the editor is invited to discount my review accordingly).

However, I’m pretty sure that much of my troubles with the paper reflect its own shortcomings of exposition. First, the paper repeatedly mentions a problem of “bias” associated with the computation of Disabled Life Expectancy (DLE), but I’m not sure where, exactly, that bias is supposedly manifested. There needs to be a much clearer explanation of just where the supposed bias arises.

For there to be “bias” there must be a true value. The paper evidently means to argue against the use of a period, prevalence-based approach to computing DLE (e.g., the so-called “Sullivan” approach) based on an age-schedule of the prevalence of disability, when the “true” underlying process of disability prevalence is generated by time to death (TTD) rather than age. However, given the inevitable finiteness of human life, there is an automatic and mechanical (and large) negative correlation between age and TTD. Even if (as is demonstrated in Figure 1) TTD is somehow “better” than age as a single-index summary of disability—and while the paper does not say so plainly, it seems that TTD is “better” because it has a smaller variance than does age—age is still strongly related to disability, and a pure period-based measure of DLE is by definition “correct” even if influenced by TTD patterns rather than age.

Perhaps another way of expressing my discomfort is to point out that the problems exposed in this paper seem exclusively to be related to comparisons, either over time “within” a population (the quotation marks reflecting the fact that the “same” population at 2 different times is, in fact, 2 different populations unless there are neither births nor deaths) or between populations at a point in time. If a single-index (e.g., age) based indicator is the basis for comparisons of phenomena driven by 2 (or more) phenomena (e.g., not only age but also TTD) then it is not at all surprising—or, there is nothing new in pointing out—that there may be ambiguity in the allocation of differences to their various components. In other words, there is nothing “wrong” (indeed there cannot BE anything “wrong”) in the computation of DLE using Sullivan, if the purpose of doing so is summarize point-in-time experience, and even if disability prevalence is driven by TTD rather than age. The fault (if any) arises only when we turn to comparisons.

I am also troubled by the use of deterministic relationships (as in equations 1-3), which implies that we can treat the TTD-disability relationship as fixed. At the individual level, it is not hard to envision an intervention that reduces TTD (all the way down to zero), but there may also be interventions that increase it. At the population level, things are perhaps a bit more messy, but I think the point remains, it is dangerous to assume a fixed TTD-disability pattern. And it is certainly a mistake to adopt the pure “TTD-only” approach that is taken throughout most of the paper. 

Continuing with my theme of problems with exposition, I object to the characterization, in the “toy” example (pp. 6-7) of a reduction in age-specific disability prevalence due to a combination of falling mortality and a fixed TTD-disability pattern, as one that produces 2 artificial populations for which the “essential character” of disability is unchanged. The assumptions adopted here are quite extreme (i.e., the “TTD only” assumption) but even granting those assumptions, I would argue that a reduction in age-specific disability prevalence brought about in this way is just as “real” as the reduced death rates that get all the credit for it. Again, there is a mechanical and unavoidable negative correlation between age and TTD; if one changes, then the other has to change.

Another issue is the paper’s complete disregard of any selection biases introduced through the use of HRS decedents only. But, this probably doesn’t matter because the TTD profiles that the HRS data supports are only used in the service of conducting an illustrative, artificial-population exercise. Still it might make sense to at least point out that the data are being abused in this instance. 

The comparisons illustrated in Figure 5 are also quite a mystery to me. I don’t at all understand the last 2 sentences in the final paragraph ending on p. 12 (“The true value… [is] zero by design. ... "). And the paper does not provide the reader with nearly enough guidance on how to read the 9 images shown in Figure 5.

To summarize, there is surely something going on here, and there may even be something that is properly called “bias,” but I don’t know what the something is, nor do I know exactly where the bias arises. All this could be better explained.
